How to Convince Dad\* of the Importance of Self-Sovereign Identity
==================================================================

### \* and your sister and your daughter and your best friend and your nephew and yourself

Abstract
--------

One of the major problems with bootstrapping self-sovereign identity is
that it requires adoption by a large number of people. Pushing
self-sovereign identity from the top down is most likely to result in a
technology that’s not actually used, while instead encouraging the
average person to demand self-sovereign identity from the bottom up will
result in the organic development of a vibrant, well-utilized
decentralized web ecosystem.

This paper addresses that need by offering arguments to a variety of
people who might be reluctant to use self-sovereign identity,
uninterested in its possibilities, or oblivious to the dangers of
centralization.

Introduction
------------

-   SECTION 1: THE INTRO

-   Objective:

    -   To portray the importance of Self-sovereign identity for the mainstream audience

    -   To drive adoption

    -   Envision use-cases based on technology not so far in the future.

-   Five individuals living in the first world over a variety of age groups and profiles

    -   Why these five people? \[Spectrum of first-world society, who can drive adoption\]

-   In many cases, we can give examples of existing tech specifics, what is lacking is interoperable layers ?

    -   Some of these uses of DIDs are immediately available, but some require development

    -   Aim for developers to start thinking about implementations

-   A self-sovereign identity can create a Paradigm shift in an data-centric world!!!!

-   SECTION 2: A Few Definitions

    -   Self-sovereign identity as a concept

    -   DIDs

    -   Decentralized computing / web

    -   Verifiable credential

Your Dad is Preparing for Retirement
------------------------------------

Dad is getting ready to retire, which has him thinking more about his
financial security. So much of it is online now! He has to use his
laptop computer to pay some of his bills from his bank account, and he
looks at his retirement accounts through his browser too! He has a few
different logins and passwords, because the different institutions have
different requirements. He keeps them written down on a yellow post-it
that he hides in his desk drawer. Recently, he’s become paranoid about
having his money stolen because his best friend got phished by someone
claiming that their Microsoft Windows installation needed updating,
which let the hackers install a keylogger on their computer and steal
some money. Though Dad finally traded in his flip phone for a smartphone
last year, he doesn’t use it for anything but reading news stories and
text messages.

*“I hate having to log into so many financial accounts.”*

*The Problem.* Dad gets annoyed at all these confusing accounts and
logins and passwords. He’d like to have a single account that accesses
all of his financial services and he’d prefer to not even need a login
and password for it.

*The Solution.* Self-sovereign identity allows Dad to maintain separate
and secure identity records on his smart phone. He accesses them using
biometrics: he just looks at his computer’s camera, it scans his face,
and then the smartphone verifies his identity to his laptop. This gives
him access to all of his financial accounts, without needing to type
login or password. An app on his computer consolidates all of the
information from the accounts, and allows him to view his finances,
write checks, and free up retirement money.

*“I’m afraid someone will steal my money through some sort of fake
login.”*

*The Problem.* Dad is especially vulnerable to phishing attacks, in
which someone obtains access to his financial accounts by pretending to
represent the financial institution. He lives in constant fear about
losing his nest egg: he is concerned that it is impossible to tell the
difference between a legitimate representative and a scammer.

*The Solution.* Because Dad logs in using his smartphone and face
recognition, there is no way for him to accidentally log in to a fake
portal. The application will take him to the correct site.

*“If I get my identity stolen, I’m screwed.”*

*The Problem.* Dad has heard a lot about the ravages of identity theft:
attackers stole names, phone numbers, and addresses from Home Depot and
stole reams of identity information from Equifax. Dad is afraid that the
thieves could use this information to steal his money at his financial
institutions, or to take or credit or loans in his name.

*The Solution.* This sort of breach would be less likely in a world of
self-sovereign identity because users can safeguard their information
under their self-sovereign identity, preventing it from entering large
honeypots of personally identifiable information (PII). But, even if a
breach were to expose Dad’s information, it wouldn’t affect his access
to financial institutions: they wouldn’t give access to his account
without the validation from his smartphone; if someone tried to take out
a new loan using his PII, the bank or credit bureau would go out to Dad
for verification. Thus, in the world of self-sovereign identity, PII is
less valuable and its use is more tightly under Dad’s control.

Your Sister is a World Traveller 
---------------------------------

Sis works with *Médecins Sans Frontières* offering humanitarian
assistance. This brings her to dozens of countries, some of which have
non-western values. Sometimes she’s been targeted by the authorities,
which has put her in jeopardy. She also has occasionally needed to seek
treatment in these countries due to the problems that a varying diet
causes for her diabetes.

*“I’m afraid of losing my passport.”*

*The Problem.* Sis was once forced to leave her passport behind when she
had to flee a city without returning to her lodgings due to the local
authority’s disagreement with *MSF*. This terrified her because, a
passport is expected to be in a traveler’s possession when they are
traveling in a foreign country. This left her unable to easily leave the
country, which she now felt was hostile to her presence. Replacing her
passport was both time consuming and logistically challenging. She is
horrified of the idea of repeating this experience.

*The Solution.* Sis has a digital passport stored on a hardware device
that acts as a data store for; she keeps it attached to her keychain.
She can unlock and transmit her passport data using her thumbprint. If
she loses her physical passport, she has this backup. Some countries may
accept it themselves, but otherwise she can see it to quickly and easily
establish her identity to the local embassy simply by logging onto her
government’s online platform and without needing to physically travel.

*“I don’t want the police looking at my passport if they stop me.”*

*The Problem.* Sis has experienced harassment from the police when they
were reviewing her passport due to her country of origin and even
extensive interviews because of all the countries she has visited.

*The Solution.* When Sis enters a country, the border agents issue
digital documents (a verifiable credential) approving her legal status
in the country for a certain span of time. She adds this to her
self-sovereign identity’s data store. When she’s stopped by the police,
she uses her hardware device to selectively disclose only her name and
the credential issued by the border agents. The police now know who she
is and what her status is; they don’t need to know about her country or
origin or past travels, because the border agents have already verified
that, so she doesn’t give that to them.

*“I worry that I don’t have all of my health records with me.”*

*The Problem.* Sis has type 1 diabetes and has to ensure her sugar
levels stay stable. While she is traveling if she were to have a medical
emergency she needs the doctors to know the details of her condition,
including her current medications and allergies without having to carry
a sheaf of documents.

*The Solution.* Sis keeps her medical records on her hardware device, so
using her self-sovereign identity she can protect the information or
share it when necessary. In addition, the encoded digital nature of her
medical records make it easy to translate into different languages.

Your Daughter is a Reckless Social Media User
---------------------------------------------

Daughter has spent a her life publishing pictures, tweeting, and posting
on Facebook and Snapchat. Now that she is going for job interviews, she
realizes all of her photos of holidays and parties and all of her tweets
are a bit more public than she would like.

*“I don’t want to show my employer everything.”*

*The Problem.* Daughter is going for a job interview soon and has heard
rumors of employers making hiring decisions based on social media
profiles. Now she is concerned over which of her images and tweets will
turn up if they access her social media account.

*The Solution.* With self-sovereign identity, Daughter has granular
control over who sees what in her social media feeds. When she gives
potential employers access, she gives access to feeds that selectively
disclose specific tags.

*“I’ve put something online that I can’t take back.”*

*The Problem.* Daughter’s photo blog features a picture of her in front
of a popular storefront that mentions it’s very near her house. This
photo went viral over the weekend, which brought a huge amount of
attention to her online presence. Shortly afterward, she got a creepy
email from someone mentioning the store she was at and the city it’s in;
she’s afraid she accidentally revealed too much about herself.

*The Solution.* Daughter’s self-sovereign identity is on her mobile
phone, and it signs every picture she takes as part of the image file.
This allows her to prove ownership of the photo. After she realizes the
picture is problematic, she sends out a request to the social media
networks and search engines to remove it; most sites will do so since
she can prove her ownership of the photo.

*“I’m afraid of being doxxed.”*

*The Problem.* Daughter has been vocal on the issue of presentation of
female characters in video games in recent years, and she just heard
about a few friends getting doxxed because of similar comments online.
She is afraid that she might be a target of harassment.

*The Solution.* Daughter’s social media platform has incorporated many
novel features that have evolved out of the self-sovereign ecosystem.
This enables her to selectively disclose her PII to only people who have
received attestations from a select group of friends that she defines.
She immediately activates this feature to better control access to her
personal information.

Your Best Friend is a Content Creator
-------------------------------------

Best Friend is working in a non-Western country. He’s an
entrepreneur who regularly vlogs about the local startup scene.
Sometimes his comments are opinionated, and this has caused tension with
the companies and the local government that supports them. His vlogs are
posted to the local social media networks, which are also controlled by
that government, but his followers are worldwide, including both local
and western business leaders.

*“I don’t want my followers to lose access to my published work.”*

*The Problem.* The local social media network has a reputation for
following the whims of the local government. Sometimes they arbitrarily
delete posts that they don’t agree with. Best Friend is concerned
that when this happens, his followers may now see references and
citations to his work, but not be able to access the original posts.

*The Solution.* Best Friend uses his self-sovereign identity to
publish all of his videos. They’re posted to his datastore, a
decentralized file storage system that is accessible through his
self-sovereign identity and provably attributable to him. Hyperlinked
citations and references connect to this original data source, so even
if the content on the local social network is removed, anyone looking at
a citation or reference can still find the original content and know
that he wrote it, even though it’s no longer connected to his social
media presence.

*“I’m afraid of losing my followers”*

*The Problem.* If Best Friend is sufficiently troublesome, the
local government might delete his social media account entirely. This
could cost him all the connections and relationship that he’s built on
the social media network.

*The Solution.* Best Friend created his social media account using
his self-sovereign identity, fundamentally linking them. His western
followers tended to do the same, while his local followers only have
localized accounts. If his local social media account is deleted, he
automatically maintains links to everyone with a self-sovereign
identity. He unfortunately loses access to all of the followers with
local accounts, but his self-sovereign identity was available through
his social media account and remains available through any citations and
references. Any local follower could choose to link to his
self-sovereign identity with this information.

*“I don’t want to get arrested for what I write.”*

*The Problem.* The local government has now decided Best Friend is
troublesome and actively targets him for a smear and disinformation
campaign, designed to get him arrested. They do so by publishing
portions of his material that are taken out of context with a negative
spin.

*The Solution.* All of Best Friend’s videos are time-stamped, then
signed with his self-sovereign identity. He can refute the
out-of-context statement by showing the full video, proving that its
his, and demonstrating its origin. The more reputable news agencies only
use signed videos of this sort; though the propaganda network continues
using the out-of-context video, no one else replicates it.

Your Nephew Runs a Convenience Store
------------------------------------

Nephew has decided to open his first business! But, he wants to do
more than just run any convenience store, he wants to run a convenience
store that’s sustainable. He’s done a good job of getting it off the
ground, but he’s a one-man operation, and so sometimes details slip
through the cracks. He’s also thinking about serial entrepreneurship, so
he doesn’t plan for this to be his last venture.

*“I don’t want to accidentally sell products that aren’t sustainable if
I say they are.”*

*The Problem.* Nephew is concerned with the claims that various
products make about their sustainability and provenance. There have been
many recent articles about false claims, and his customers are asking
questions he can’t answer. For his brand to stand out, he wants some
degree of confidence about the products he’s selling.

*The Solution.* Independent inspectors can create verifiable credentials
for the authenticity of the sustainable products that Nephew sells
in his store. Nephew is able to authenticate these credentials and
then attests their veracity with his self-sovereign identity. So long as
his customers trust him, they no longer need to verify the authenticity
of their goods themselves, though they may if they wish.

*“I want to be able to get the best value for my business when I sell.”*

*The Problem.* Nephew knows that he could open the books of his
business to show its profitability and lay out its money flow to
potential purchasers. But this information isn’t verifiable!

*The Solution.* With the aid of self-sovereign identity,
Nephew is able to prove a full-spectrum, well-defined,
verifiable suite of
business analytics because every purchase order, every credit card sale,
every inventory item, and every bill payment is signed with the
business’ DID. This provability increases the value of his business.

*“I sometimes forget to order things.”*

*The Problem.* Because of his lack of staff, Nephew worries
constantly about losing track of inventory, which can result in delays
of supply that have a negative impact on revenue.

*The Solution.* Nephew has extended permissions to his smart
refrigerator to use the business’ DID to initiate and sign purchase
orders on his behalf. Because the refrigerator has sensors that track
inventory, this automates reordering supplies. The fridge simply issues
a purchase order signed with the business’ DID and the refrigerator’s
DID, verifying both the authenticity and the origin of the order. This
in turn gives his supplier a sense of security that the orders are valid

Conclusion
----------

1.  \[we hope this will be a library for convincing people, but …\]

    a.  We offered looks at how ss-i can impact finances, government
        > interactions, privacy, content, and business

    b.  S-si can extend to many other use cases

    c.  It’s particular helpful for marginilized people, where it might
        > create more impact for people such as refugees, oppressed
        > people, disadvantaged, people living in autocratic system

2.  “...radically change the structure of the social contract…”

3.  We’re not quite here for some of these techs

4.  Developers need to help us get there

5.  CALL TO ACTION

6.  But we should be careful of any identity systems

    a.  If misused

    b.  If not developed right

    c.  If creates honey pots

    d.  Increased attack surface

Appendix - \[Folded into the conclusion\]
-----------------------------------------

Say that we picked first-world Anglo-American examples because we think
first world is what will drive development, but self-sovereign identity
may offer even more value to rest of world, particularly people like

-   The refugee

-   The person without freedom of speech (oppressive Governments /
    > regimes)
